>> Richard Feldman: Support for
as previously,
mentioned that we're gonna
talk about type unification.
So first,
we're gonna do some unifying of operators,
operators in the sense of like plus and
times binary operators.
We're talking about type mismatches.
So far we have not done anything that can
possibly cause a slight mismatch, but
now we will.
This is aired like support like
a part-time, and then finally,
the actual unify function itself.
The function is gonna drive a lot of
what we're doing throughout the rest of
this process.
It's a very,
very important function, unify.
Okay, so
type unification basically is a way to
say these two types should be identical.
I'm choosing to use the word identical
here because that's a common one in
the literature, but honestly, there's
no one word that I found that is like,
really, really a good one-to-one
correspondence of what unification is,
the best answer to like,
what is type unification say?
It says that these two types are unified
according to the type unification
algorithm [LAUGH].
So we're gonna see what the actual code
looks like, you can kinda just walk
through the conditionals and sort of
understand what it's doing that way.
But conceptually kinda fuzzy if you sort
of squint and it's a little bit hazy,
it's kinda like these two
types should be identical,
but it does mean something more specific
than that, we'll get into what that means.
And a very important thing,
compared to our previous section,
where we were only dealing with constants,
is that this is a way to impose
multiple constraints on types.
So previously, we just had a equals hi,
b equals a, c equals b.
At no point were any of those types in the
database impacted by multiple constraints
at once, it was always just like
handing off to someone else.
So now we're gonna start talking about
scenarios, and there's gonna be a lot
of them in a type checker where you
have types that are being constrained by
multiple things, and the type inference
is not just like, I'm just handing off to
this thing, but it's like, well,
this thing is saying this, and
this thing is saying this, and sometimes
that there's a happy agreement there.
We're like, good, everybody agrees,
we're all set, and then, of course,
sometimes they disagree, and
then that's when we have a type mismatch.
And a type mismatch error
is basically the bread and
butter of the type of reporting
that our type checker or
type inference system is going
to do as far as build time.
Okay, so
start off by unifying some operators here.
So we'll start off with our classic const
a = hi, const b = a, but this time,
instead of doing a const c
equals like we did last time,
now we're gonna actually run an operator,
we're gonna do a times b.
Now operators can be implemented in
different ways, in different languages.
The way that we are choosing to implement
them in this language is that it's
basically like a hard coded built into the
language thing where we know that the rule
is, anytime you see one of these stars,
we're saying both things on either side
of it have to be a number, and also the
whole thing is gonna evaluate to a number.
There's other languages where you have
custom operators and stuff like that,
where this might not be the case,
but again, for
our simplified subset of JavaScript,
that's the rule.
It's just like we know right now at
compile time, this has to be a number,
this has to be a number, and
the whole thing is gonna return or
evaluate to a number.
Given that,
what we want is we want our type checker
to infer two type mismatches here.
The first type mismatch is because
a is set to be a string, and
we said this is supposed to be a number,
but it's not a number, it's a string.
And the second thing is that b is supposed
to be a, so again, using type inference,
we should know that b is also a string,
and
therefore b should get its own type
mismatch, because b is also not a number,
and both of these
are supposed to be numbers.
So that's what we're trying to aim for
here, end up with two type mismatches.
So we're gonna start by doing exactly
the same thing we did last time.
It's gonna be a recurring theme throughout
the course, is just go through and
assign type IDs to all these things.
So a gets 0, hi gets 1,
just like last time b gets 2, a gets 0.
And then, once again, we're gonna do this
sort of look-up thing like we did right
here, where we say, okay, well,
once we come down here, what's in scope?
I see a is 0, and then b is,
once again, gonna be 2.
So initially, when we just have 0, 1,
and 2 in here in our type's database,
everything's null, just like last time.
We're gonna add a little three later on
that is gonna be the type of the entire
multiplication operation,
like what it actually returns.
But for now, we're just gonna start off
by just dealing with the types of 1 and
2, so that's a, b, and hi, so
0, 1, and 2, a, b, and hi.
So a once again is 0, b is 2,
and then this is a 3.
Okay, so at the beginning, again, we have
exactly the same thing as last time.
We first go through and we say, okay,
a has a relationship with this thing where
it's similar to it, and basically
whatever type this ends up having,
that is exactly the type
that id 0 is gonna have.
And then we proceed on to 1, and we say,
it's a string literal, therefore,
it's type of string.
So far, so good, and
then we also continue on with, okay,
this thing is whatever that type is.
And then the next thing that we know
is that for sure this is a number.
And this, much like with a string literal,
is just hard-coded.
So in exactly the same way that as soon as
we see a string literal parse tree node,
we're like, that its type of string.
Anytime we see a multiplication operator,
we're like, it evaluates to is a number.
So we can just write that down without
having to do any relationship stuff.
Okay, so that's the basics.
So far, at this point, we've basically
just done the same kinda stuff that we did
in the previous section,
just with a slightly different example.
Now let's make it more interesting.
So what we're gonna do next is we're
gonna do what's called unifying both
the operators arguments that are going
into the star with the number type.
So unifying essentially means we're going
to call this unify function on each of
them, passing them as
one of the arguments and
then something else as one
of the other arguments.
In this case, it's gonna be zero and
number and then two and number.
So what does that look like,
and what does that actually do?
So conceptually, I'm gonna start off
with just sort of like a high-level,
kinda fuzzy description of
the basics of unification.
Then we're gonna get into code,
which is gonna be much more detailed and
give you a much sharper
picture of what this is doing.
But at a basic level, if we're zoomed out,
if I give unify two nulls, that is to say,
two entries in the database that
have not been initialized at all.
They're just kinda like still in
that very early, we just went around
assigning things, and nobody really
knows what these are yet state.
If you give it two nulls,
that says, okay, well,
one of these nulls is
gonna turn into a symlink.
I'm not saying exactly which one it is,
this arrow, by the way, is not returned.
This is like, what it's gonna do,
if that makes sense.
So it's gonna symlink one
of them to the other one.
The order is not
necessarily that critical,
the critical thing is the relationship.
It's saying this thing, anytime you ask
it what it is, it's that other one, and
now we have linked the two together.
Actually, it's pretty important that you
don't symlink them to each other because
then you're like, hey,
what are your values?
You have to go ask that one.
Hey, what's your value?
You have to go ask that one, and
then you get an infinite loop.
So always only ever wanna have
one symlinked to the other,
not symlinked to each other.
The other common scenario that
you'll see is basically you
give unified two concrete types
that are exactly the same.
So basically this one's like,
hey, I have two strings.
Here's a string, and
then here's another string.
This is okay, well, great, clearly,
both of you are strings, so
just stay being strings, and
we're not gonna make any changes.
Same thing if you're both numbers,
just again, no change necessary.
Obviously, the answer is these two things
unify to be a number, so no big deal.
And then of course, we have the case
where one of them is a concrete type and
the other one is a different concrete
type, and that's gonna be a type mismatch
where we actually reporting
the error to the user saying, hey,
according to the unification algorithm,
you said that this thing was a string and
it's also a number,
those are very much not identical.
If we're thinking about this as something
that's making these types identical,
therefore we're gonna
report a type mismatch and
that's gonna be the game over for
those types.
Okay, so let's put this into practice.
So at this point,
we're just gonna focus on these two.
So these other ones, they still have
those types associated with them.
The type ids associated with them, but
they're just kinda hanging
out in the database.
And the main thing that we're gonna look
at is unifying these two things with
the number type.
So essentially, from a function calling
perspective, again, in the actual code,
as you'll see,
this will actually be like a JavaScript
object with more stuff going on it.
But if we just think about this
conceptually as we're calling the unify
function, passing a number, and
then one of these things being a string,
that's gonna be a type mismatch.
Same thing with the other one,
it's gonna be a type mismatch.
So the whole problem here is that if I
look up what is the type of a, a is id 0.
Id 0 says, go ask 1, 1 says I'm a string,
b says I'm an id 2, id 2 also points to 0,
which points to 1, which points to string.
And so
when unify operates on its two values,
it is going with what is at the end of
the line here, what is the ultimate value?
Ultimate in the sense, not the ultimate,
in the sense of the last one in the chain.
If you completely resolve these symlinks,
you follow them all the way through,
what is the actual type there?
If you were hovering over this
in your editor and you asked,
what is the type here?
That's what unify is getting.
So unify is not being given, well,
okay, technically it is being given,
like the zero and the two, but the first
thing it does is just turn them into,
just traverse all the symlinks and
get me either a concrete type or a null,
does something where I'm like there
is no further hops to traverse.
I have traversed as far as possible,
that's what I'm gonna be considering.
And that's why, when it gets these, it's
like, okay, I see a number and a string,
I see a type mismatch, I see a number and
string, I see a type mismatch.
Even though, if you look at each of these,
it doesn't say number right here or
string right here.
If you follow the symlinks,
it does end up saying string, and
that's why it ends up unifying
these two to a type mismatch.
So for that perspective, great,
our goal of inferring two type mismatches,
great success.
We have succeeded [LAUGH] in inferring
two type mismatches as desired.
So now let's go take a look
at the actual code here,
because this is the part that I think
is the most important to understand.
That was the sort of high-level overview,
conceptual.
Here's how we get the type
matches out of it.
But the specifics of this
algorithm are very important.
So, to recap, we started off
with turning things into tokens.
We've got our source code right here, and
we build up multiple
different tokens here.
So this one is type const,
this one's type identifier.
Then we turn those into parse tree nodes,
which is just a nested form of the tokens.
Then we turn those into typed parse
tree nodes where we added the typeId.
And then we started building up our types
database with all the nulls at first, and
then putting in the relationships.
And then finally, we have the actual
code that builds those up.
So with all of that in mind,
here is where we have ended up code-wise.
We've done all that other stuff.
We have completely populated
our types database right up to
the point of saying we have these
two additional constraints,
which is that the thing to the left
of the star needs to be a number, and
the thing to the right of the star
also needs to be a number.
And I did mention that when we
are thinking about these things,
it's really important that we're not
unifying based on what's actually
in the row in the database, but rather
after you traverse all the symlinks,
what is that value?
So the very first thing that unify does,
cuz it does take two type Ids, is it says,
look, just go, I'm gonna call this
function, resolve symlinks and
compress just so you know
everything that it's doing [LAUGH].
[COUGH] And that's basically
saying give me the typeId,
I'm gonna turn that into an actual type,
so a concrete type or a null.
So this point is not an ID anymore.
This resolves symlinks and
compress function.
Hopefully, you can guess what it does.
It resolves all the symlinks and
then does path compression.
This is the first thing that it does,
is like, do that for both a and b, and
this is exactly the reason that it is so
important for
performance that you have
the path compression.
So if you imagine,
every single time we're going through and
calling this unify function,
which happens all the time.
If you don't have the path compression on,
you're traversing those long hops over and
over and over again.
So it's a huge deal for performance that
we're able to compress those down and say,
yep, just one hop, no big deal.
Okay, next thing we do is we start
looking into different scenarios.
So the first scenario is basically like,
okay,
let's suppose that even after resolving
those symlinks, a is still null,
which means that, basically,
we don't have any information about a.
The term for this is an unbound variable.
It's basically like, yeah, we put it in
there, we wrote down, this is your ID, but
in the database, it's still null.
We don't actually know anything
about this thing at all.
So when that's the case,
the first thing we wanna do is say, okay,
we're going to give a some sort of type.
For sure,
we're gonna write something in there.
So this is db[aTypeId], and
this is why it's important that we have
the TypeId in addition to the actual type.
We look at the actual type when we're
considering what to do with it.
But then we need the TypeId so that we
know where to store things in the database
if we wanna make changes,
which Unify very often does.
So we're gonna store something
new in the database and
we're gonna do a little ternary here.
So first we're gonna say, okay, was b also
null, a was null, but was b null as well?
If b was also null,
then we're in that first scenario I talked
about a couple slides ago where it's like,
okay, both of these are currently null,
we don't know anything about them, or at
least we didn't, but now we know whatever
they end up being, they are linked.
So we're gonna make a, b a symlink of b,
could also just as easily put b as
a symlink of a here, but we're gonna be
a-focused because a was at the top of
the [LAUGH] null check by coincidence.
But then there's also
the possibility that b was not null.
So the next scenario we're
about to look at is a was null,
we don't know anything about a, but
b already had something going on, and
not just a symlink,
cuz we already resolved all the symlinks.
So this means that basically,
b was a concrete type at this point.
So at this point, we know,
by process elimination,
it couldn't be a symlink cuz we
already resolved all the symlinks.
We already had a check to see if
it was null, so if it's not null,
it's not assembling,
it's gotta be a concrete type.
So here, at this point, we're like,
okay, cool, that means that basically,
if we know that b is a concrete type,
we know that it has the concrete field.
That's the shape of the object,
it's like one of these concrete things.
And basically this is just
saying just duplicate it.
We're just gonna say, okay,
whatever b was, I mean, a was null,
we are now just saying,
boom, just duplicate that.
I mentioned previously that this is also a
place where it's totally reasonable if you
want to, to just always symlink it.
And just say, well, yeah, I don't wanna
potentially copy that big concrete thing.
What if this is a gigantic concrete type?
Totally reasonable, basically,
I wanted to just kind of show
the other way of doing this.
But if you want to, you can do exactly
the same thing we did in path compression.
And just say, yeah, I'm not even
gonna bother with this conditional,
I'm just gonna just always symlink a to b.
And then, wash my hands of it,
I'm all done.
So, whether or not you have this
conditional is kind of up to you in this
particular scenario, but I do wanna note,
and I did wanna show the conditional that
what's actually happening
here is pretty important.
It's not like you're just sort
of uncritically just saying,
a is just gonna be symlink
to b like no matter what.
If you're not aware of those scenarios,
you could run into an edge case,
like what if b is a symlink?
We're not really looking at that here,
but I think I may have actually,
in one of the solutions, I think I may
have actually done that as one of the edge
cases of like, okay, well,
it is technically possible that.
No, it's technically possible
because we resolve the symlink,
I'm thinking of something else.
So yeah, definitely at this point,
either b is going to be null or
it's going to be concrete because if it
were symlink, it would have been resolved.
So, putting all that together,
it's basically this is another one of
those scenarios where it's up to your
choice as a compiler author
which design you wanna go with.
Either you can copy the concrete thing, or
you can do what we did with in path
compression and just say, yep,
they're just symlinked, and
that's how they're related.